---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-01-25T03:40:05.524Z'
dateModified: '2016-01-25T03:39:43.006Z'
title: "Tithing\_"
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-01-25-tithing.md
published: true
url: tithing/index.html
_type: Article

---
# Tithing 

In choosing the first topic to post about, I basically wanted to find the most controversial and explosive topic that I could write about. But then I thought about it, and sex is just too much to cover on the first post. What I need to do is lay some groundwork to give you a good feel for where I'm coming from. But I also need a topic that is near and dear enough to engage you and keep you listening. 

Money is a great one. I like money and tithing as a topic because people believe they have this one sewn up. They know the teaching. They're comfortable with it. They obey the rules. Churches talk about it A LOT (especially when they're doing a building project). But that's exactly the reason I like it. We've repeated the same things so often that we're absolutely sure they're in the Bible, when really they're not. This topic gives me a chance to show that, even though we think we're doing a good job following what the Bible says, we really have no clue. 

Take the basic principle of tithing. Most churches today will teach that you should give 10% of your income, "the tithe" to your local church and then the extra, the "offerings" to the church or other worthy causes. 

There's just one problem with this. It's not in the Bible. Really. In fact, not only is the directive not in the Bible, not even the PRINCIPLE of giving a certain percentage of your income to the local church is in the Bible. 

I could just leave it there, but I know that there's at least one of you who's running right now to your concordance to find all the scriptures that talk about giving 10%, so I'll head off at least some of the arguments and flesh out my own thinking at the same time. 

## Old Testament Directives on Giving 

There are a few problems with trying to cite the Old Testament as justification for giving 10%, the main one being that we don't follow any of the directives in the Old Testament. If you want to quote Old Testament law to me, then you need to be ready to explain why we should follow the directives on giving found in the Old Testament but not follow the directive to routinely slaughter animals and sprinkle their blood on the sides of the altar. 

You'll find I don't go into detail quoting verses and such. They are there, but the problem is you have to really read the whole book for it to make sense. Therefore my reference is Deuteronomy. 

Here's what Deuteronomy says: Once it says to set aside a tenth of the harvest, and then once it says to set aside a tenth every third year. In fact, depending on how you read it there may actually be a second tenth on top of the first one. 

Hmmm...two tenths....of the same harvest....that's not 10%. It sounds suspiciously like 20%. The third time, he directs them to take ANOTHER tenth of the harvest every third year. So, now we have a conundrum. This is a kind of complicated math formula. Let's see...10% twice a year, an additional 10% every third year....carry the one...that ends up being 23.3% averaged over three years, depending on how you depreciate your harvests. 

So we're getting kind of far away from this idea of "give 10%." But the problems don't end there. If you take a look at where the tithe is supposed to be given, you run into even more problems. The first two 10 percents are supposed to be saved for a special feast which will be enjoyed by...the family who supplied it. Not given to a church, or a temple, or a priest, but consumed by the very people who "donated" it. In fact, the Bible is very specific in stating that if the food won't keep on the journey, you sell the tenth of your harvest so that you can buy "whatever you want" to celebrate in Jerusalem. 

The final 10%, the one collected every third year, is supposed to be directly distributed to the people who have no means of supporting themselves: the Levites (which includes the priests), illegal immigrants, widows and orphans.
Now, I don't hear of any churches - not EVER - saying that we need to be donating 10% of every third year's income to illegal immigrants, even though THAT IS ACTUALLY WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS. 

So where did this idea come from that we must donate 10% of our income to the local church? 
Not the Old Testament. 

## New Testament Directives on Giving

After we eliminate the Old Testament, we look for the 10% principle in the New Testament. There are even more problems with looking to the New Testament to justify this behavior. With the Old Testament, we simply don't follow any of its rules, and with the New Testament, we don't come anywhere close to the "rules" or the example the early Christians set. 

The early Christians didn't think in percentages or math - for them it was a simple all or nothing prospect. Becoming a Christian meant giving up every single thing you owned or had acquired (or even would acquire), putting it into a common pot that everyone in the church had access to, and living in complete dependence on God and his provision. The common money of the church was used mainly to provide meals for the church - literally every meal of every day - and the poor and destitute.

But beyond that, the early Churches gave to each other as well. There is record that some Churches donated to Paul and also sent offerings to the Church in Jerusalem. But no record of a percentage of income. 

So in the New Testament we see radical generosity as the new standard. In fact, the only time we see percentages talked about is when God strikes dead some people for keeping a SMALL PART of THEIR OWN MONEY back for themselves. 

Do we see anywhere in the New Testament a teaching about giving 10%? 

No. 

## What does the Bible actually say?

What about rules? What about specific directives? Why doesn't the Bible just give us a clear-cut law? 

Sorry, the Bible doesn't work that way (intentionally, I believe). So what can we do? If the Bible doesn't have clear instructions, it must have at least a few principles to follow. 

In fact, it does. Quite a few, but there are two main palces in the New Testament that address how much money we should give: when Jesus is asked about taxes, and in 2nd Corinthians. 

When Jesus was asked about taxes, he said "Whose image is on this coin?" When he starts talking about an image, it's a reference to the ten commandments, which specifically forbid carving an image of a person like that. Jews would have been religiously offended that there was a picture of a person on the coin - it violated their religious laws and it was sort of a sore spot that they were forced to use money from a country they hated that blatantly disregarded one of their holiest laws. But the idea of an image woud also allude to the story of creation, when God creates man "in his image." After Jesus gets people thinking along those lines, he says "Give to Ceasar what is Ceasar's, and give to God what is God's." His meaning is very clear: all that you are and all that you will ever do is God's, just as this money is Ceaser's. You are to give God control of all areas of your life, including ALL of your finances. 

In 2nd Corinthians (9:7) Paul explains that we should give without compulsion or reluctance, but instead cheerfully. 

So, factoring in what Jesus said about our image and what Paul says about giving cheerfully, it appears that the Biblical standard for money is to cheerfully, unreluctantly, give everything we have or will ever acquire the moment God requires it of us. It is no longer a rule, there is no handy percentage that we can simply check off a list. In fact, there never was a percentage! We can no longer rely on a set, predetermined value of how much money to give away.
So how do we determine what is right? Is 10% good, or is it 5%, or 30%? To find out, we must engage in a relationship with God on a day-to-day basis to determine what he is asking of us for that day, whether we are to give everything away or safely invest it, or something in between. 

The Biblical standard for giving is not 10%, it's personal relationship with God. 

## What does all this mean?

What am I driving at? Well, I'm hoping to illustrate that Christians don't know what the heck the Bible says. We blindly repeat things over and over without even knowing why we believe them. This is probably the biggest problem in the Christian world today. Even preachers and pastors, who have supposedly spent a long time studying this, repeat things that are clearly not espoused by the Bible. Don't get me wrong: if someone has never given anything ever, 10% is a good place to start, but it ultimately cheats people out of the daily relationship that's required to live a generous life. Presenting it as iron-clad Biblical truth when it's clearly not is a symptom of the deeper problem. 

My point is that it's simple to look this stuff up, but we never have. We don't know the religion we claim to believe, then we're confused when we have no authority or ability to engage the culture around us. 

The other point I'm trying to make is that there are some things in our religion that are so wide-spread they are essentially a given. Tithing is the perfect example. Go to any church in America and ask them what the Biblical rule on giving is, and you'll get the 10% answer. But we've become unmoored from a Biblical basis. We're slowly crafting a religion that has major tenants that are not in the Bible. 

The unfortunate part of the story is that tithing is but one small area that this has happened. Churches today have a whole host of issues that they have formed opinions on that have nothing to do with the Bible, or even with common sense. I'll be addressing more of these in the near future.